Add `oneof` configuration predicate to support exclusive features (#2962)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-cfg-oneof.md

- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Addition of `oneof` to existing `all`, `any`, `not` configuration predicates in `#[cfg!()]` macros

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

In a number of situations (particularly involving `no_std` and cross-target applications) it is useful to ensure that only one of a set of features are enabled.
It is important to enforce this due to the additive behaviour of features (ie. dependencies may include the same sub-dependencie with different features enabled the result is a union of the enabled features), and difficult to specify for larger feature sets using existing predicates as the complexity for this increases exponentially with the number of exclusive features.

The desired outcome of this is the ability to specify `#[cfg(oneof(feature="a", feature="b"))] do_something()` and `#[cfg(not(oneof(feature="a", feature="b")))] compile_error!(...)` to specify exclusive features without manually defining all possible valid/invalid combinations for the exclusive subset of features, and simplify other configurations that benefit from the `oneof` predicate.

> This allows authors of crates with exclusive feature sets to communicate this to consumers without requiring users to infer the feature issue from compiler errors.

Reviewer: This isn't the *only* way to allow such a thing. As you mention yourself:

> without manually defining all...

Author: sure, though given the burden of the current approach crate authors _do not_ do this.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Additions to existing [guide](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/conditional-compilation.html)

``` 
ConfigurationOneof
   oneof ( ConfigurationPredicateList )
   
...

> oneof() with a comma separated list of configuration predicates. It is true if at one and only one predicate is true. In all other situations it is false.

Reviewer: "if at one"?

Author: whoops, should be "if at least one"

Reviewer 2: I think it can still be worded more clearly:

```md
oneof() with a comma separated list of configuration predicates. It is true if and only if exactly one predicate is true. In all other situations it is false.
```

```

> Using an existing implementation from [rust-rand-facade](https://github.com/ryankurte/rust-rand-facade/blob/master/src/lib.rs) expressing all possible combinations for a set of three exclusive features (`std`, `cortex_m`, and `os_rng`).

Reviewer: I don't understand what this sentence is trying to say. Is this still a part of the addition to the guide?

Author: I can't quite tell which sentence this comment refers to.

`oneof() with a comma separated...` in the source block is part of the guide, matching the existing predicate definitions.

`Using an existing implementation...` is intended as an example, I can clarify this

Reviewer: > I can't quite tell which sentence this comment refers to.

The comment is placed on a line containing a single sentence and that's what the comment is about, so I'm not sure how I could have better communicated that.

#[cfg(not(oneof(feature = "std", feature = "cortex_m", feature = "os_rng")))]
compile_error!("One of 'os_rng', 'std', 'cortex_m' features must be enabled");
```

The latter is significantly more simple, and does not introduce additional complexity when adding further exclusive feature(s).

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

- I do not believe this has significant interaction with other features, or requires any significant changes to the tooling or language
- Implementation should be straightforward, requiring the addition of a config predicate to `rustc` based on existing configuration predicates
- I do not believe there are significant corner cases to be considered

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

N/A

# Rationale and alternatives
[rationale-and-alternatives]: #rationale-and-alternatives

- This provides a useful improvement to the expressiveness of `#[cfg()]` macros and allows crate authors to provide actionable errors rather than depending on compiler failures
- An alternative to `not(oneof(...))` could be `notoneof(...)` or similar, however, this is less generally useful and less consistent with existing predicates

> - Not implementing this means crate authors must either hand-define all variants or rely on symbol errors to enforce feature exclusivity, and users must continue to infer the _cause_ of these failures rather than being directly signalled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Not implementing this means crate authors must either hand-define all variants or rely on symbol errors to enforce feature exclusivity, and users must continue to infer the _cause_ of these failures rather than being directly signaled.
```

Reviewer: > and users must continue to infer the _cause_ of these failures rather than being directly signalled.

I don't follow how the existence of `oneof` provides this. The crate author must still choose to write it.

Author: Sure, but they/we then have the tools to reasonably do so. Do you have a suggestion for how you would reword this?

The desired outcome is the ability to specify `#[cfg(oneof(feature = "a", feature = "b"))] do_something()` and `#[cfg(not(oneof(feature = "a", feature = "b")))] compile_error!(...)` to specify exclusive features without manually defining all possible valid/invalid combinations for the exclusive subset of features, and simplify other configurations that benefit from the `oneof` predicate.
This allows authors of crates with exclusive feature sets specify this in a maintainable manner, and to communicate this to consumers without requiring users to infer the feature issue from compiler errors.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Additions to existing [guide](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/conditional-compilation.html)

``` 
ConfigurationOneof
   oneof ( ConfigurationPredicateList )
   
...

> oneof() with a comma separated list of configuration predicates. It is true if at least one and only one predicate is true. In all other situations it is false.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
oneof() with a comma separated list of configuration predicates. It is true if exactly one of the predicates is true. In all other situations it is false.
```

```

## An Example

Using an existing implementation from [rust-rand-facade](https://github.com/ryankurte/rust-rand-facade/blob/master/src/lib.rs) expressing all possible combinations for a set of three exclusive features (`std`, `cortex_m`, and `os_rng`). This is a reasonably small example, it is worth noting that it is common for embedded crates to have [tens of exclusive features](https://github.com/stm32-rs/stm32f4xx-hal/blob/master/Cargo.toml#L67).

Using existing predicates:

```rust
#[cfg(all(feature = "std", feature = "cortex_m"))]
compile_error!("Only one of 'std', 'os_rng', or 'cortex_m' features may be enabled");

#[cfg(all(feature = "std", feature = "os_rng"))]
compile_error!("Only one of 'std', 'os_rng', or 'cortex_m' features may be enabled");

#[cfg(all(feature = "cortex_m", feature = "os_rng"))]
compile_error!("Only one of 'std', 'os_rng', or 'cortex_m' features may be enabled");

#[cfg(not(any(feature = "std", feature = "cortex_m", feature = "os_rng")))]
compile_error!("One of 'os_rng', 'std', 'cortex_m' features must be enabled");
```

Using the `oneof` predicate:
```rust
#[cfg(not(oneof(feature = "std", feature = "cortex_m", feature = "os_rng")))]

> compile_error!("One of 'os_rng', 'std', 'cortex_m' features must be enabled");

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compile_error!("Exactly one of the 'os_rng', 'std', 'cortex_m' features must be enabled");
```

```

The latter is significantly more simple, and does not introduce additional complexity when adding further exclusive feature(s).

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

- I do not believe this has significant interaction with other features, or requires any significant changes to the tooling or language
- Implementation should be straightforward, requiring the addition of a config predicate to `rustc` based on existing configuration predicates
- I do not believe there are significant corner cases to be considered

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> N/A

Reviewer 4: Not true. Everything has drawbacks. This adds more complexity to the language and is redundant in functionality, although it is nice functionality.

This also could technically be provided by a separate crate.

Reviewer: > provided by a separate crate.

*Perhaps* [cfg_if](https://docs.rs/cfg-if/0.1.10/cfg_if/), but it's pretty narrowly focused.

Reviewer 4: I was thinking more of providing some sort of `oneof!` macro in a separate crate, but if we go beyond that, that works pretty well t

> # Rationale and alternatives

Reviewer 4: Possible alternative would be providing a `oneof!` macro which implements the behavour rather than a proper item, as this could be implemented with existing macros.

Reviewer 3: @clarfon True, but I think that would be much less efficient than a native implementation.

Reviewer 4: That seems like a pretty brave claim, honestly. Efficiency is not clearly defined here and I can't imagine a single use case where the difference would be noticeable to the end user.

Reviewer 3: @clarfon As far as I can tell, the expansion would be quadratic in the number of conditions.

Reviewer 4: And quadratic isn't really that bad. Computers are fast and the number of terms is low. If you can find a case where the compile time difference is on a noticeable scale then I'd say it's reasonable, but I can't imagine that ever being the case.
